# 03a User Focus

User documentation is any document that explains how to use the features and functions of a system to its end-users.

## End-user documentation

End-user documentation refers to the documentation for a product or service provided to the end users. The end-user documentation is designed to assist end users to use the product or service. This is often referred to as user assistance. The end-user documentation is a part of the overall product delivered to the customer.

!!! attention
    The end-user documentation **does not** involve detailed explanations of how the system works - the users only need to know how to use the system.

These guides need to be precise and easy to understand. In addition, well-written end-user documentation will help provide the best user experience. The quality of the user documentation can greatly affect the **rate of implementation** of (how fast users start using) the new system.

### Importance of end-user documentation

Users can learn:

1. how to use your software
2. features of your software
3. tips and tricks for your software
4. how to resolve common problems with your software

Without detailed, simple, clear instructions, users might be
**unaware** of particular features or **unable to use** features that
are not immediately obvious.

A well-made user documentation guides the user through using the system and thus **increases productivity**. If the user documentation is simple, system implementation can happen faster because users require less training to learn how to use the new system.

### Components of end-user documentation

Users expect the end-user documentation to include:

- FAQs
- Video tutorials
- Embedded assistance (for example, tooltips and dynamic page content)
- Support portals

It usually includes:

- Minimum hardware and software requirements
- Installation guide
- How to start the system
- How to use different features of the system
- Screenshots explaining the main features of the system
- Example inputs and outputs
- Explanations of error messages and troubleshooting guides
- Information to contact the developer of the system if an undocumented question arises

### Types of end-user documentation

#### Help files

Files supplied together with the system. They can usually be called up with a button in the system.

- Advantages
    - User-friendly (give general instructions on how to use the system and how to solve some major errors)
    - Fast
    - Easy to use (accessible at any time when using the program)
    - Can be accessed offline
- Disadvantages
    - Can only be used after the system has been installed (can't give any help when installing the solution)
    - Might not be detailed (often only deal with very general errors)
    - Might be hard to find (lack a search capability)
        - (Even with search) the user might not know what to search for

#### Online support

Special web service hosted by the system's developer to provide user
documentation.

- Advantages
    - A larger amount of information
    - Easier to update (continuously revised to deal with the problems occurring most often/FAQs)
    - Can provide the option for live support (talking to a real human operator)
    - Often have search capabilities built-in
    - Can be accessed from any device
    - Can be faster
- Disadvantages
    - Can't be accessed offline/with a slow internet connection
    - Live support does not work quite well with users unfamiliar with computers when they have to explain their problem

#### Printed manuals

Manuals printed on paper and supplied together with the
system.

- Advantages
    - Can be read through by users before starting to work with the new system
    - Easy to find
    - Work without a computer (always available)
    - Give help installing the system
- Disadvantages
    - Often limited to a little booklet supplying little information apart from how to install the system
    - Slower
    - Can be lost/misplaced/limited in number
    - Harder to search
    - Cannot be updated
    - Prone to physical destruction

## Technical documentation

Technical documentation addresses the system administrator's needs. Usually, this document contains information that will help in product maintenance, such as installation and updates.

Technical documentation refers to the documentation that describes how a product or service operates. For example, software code documentation, technical specifications and API documentation. Technical documentation can also describe how to install the software.

### Components of technical documentation

- Descriptions of functions
- System admin guide

## User training

Training end-users in using a new system is very important
as productivity greatly depends on how familiar they are with
a system. Effective user training is an essential part of introducing a
new system.

### Types of user training

#### Self-introduction

Users can learn how to use a new system **on their own**, provided they have the right material to learn from. It can take the form of reading a manual or watching a tutorial.

- Advantages
    - Low cost (only materials needed, no teachers/buildings)
    - Flexible timeline
    - Training tailored to exactly what users want to learn
- Disadvantages
    - With no guidance, users might feel lost/overwhelmed
    - Unstructured learning means certain features might be misunderstood/ignored

#### Formal classes

Users sit in a classroom and listen to an instructor who
shows and explains how to use the system. This type of training is useful to train large amounts of staff as it is effective and relatively cheap, but if the size of the classes is too big, there is little time to deal with individual problems and questions.

- Advantages
    - Structured learning environment
    - Expert on hand to answer questions
    - Curriculum designed to teach all aspects, including ones that might be misunderstood or difficult to grasp
- Disadvantages
    - Expensive (teachers, buildings and facilities needed)
    - Rigid schedule and curriculum
    - Not much personalisation is possible

#### Remote/Online training

An instructor training one user or a small group of users by some kind of remote connection (Skype, Google Meet, Zoom, etc). This is the most effective way of training as training can be suited to users' needs and abilities while being instructed by a professional that caters to specific needs.

- Advantages
    - Structured learning environment
    - Expert on hand to answer questions
    - Curriculum designed to teach all aspects, including ones that might be misunderstood or difficult to grasp
    - Flexible locations
- Disadvantages
    - Expensive (teachers & internet connection needed)
    - Can feel 'remote' with no quick 'hands-on'
    - Has to be computer-based
